---
title: "The Hellan--Herrmann--Johnson and TDNNS method for nonlinear Koiter and Naghdi shells"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2023-09-11-GACM
venue: "10th GACM Colloquium on Computational Mechanics"
date: 2023-09-11
location: "Vienna, Austria"
---

The slides can be found [here](http://michaelneunteufel.github.io/files/talks/gacm23_presentation.pdf).

<h2>Abstract:</h2>
The development of effective and locking free shell elements is intensive topic of research since several decades. Recently, the Hellan--Herrmann--Johnson (HHJ) method for linear Kirchhoff--Love plates [M. Comodi, The Hellan-Herrmann-Johnson method: some new error estimates and postprocessing, Mathematics of Computation, 52 (1989), 17--29] has been extended to nonlinear Koiter shells [M. Neunteufel, J. Sch&ouml;berl, The Hellan--Herrmann--Johnson method for nonlinear shells, Computers &amp; Structures, 225 (2019), 106109]. Therein, the bending moment tensor is introduced as additional unknown to rewrite the fourth order as a second order mixed saddle point problem circumventing the necessity of C1-conforming finite elements. Via hybridization techniques the saddle point translates into a minimization problem again.\\
The TDNNS method has successfully been applied to Reissner--Mindlin plates leading to a shear locking free formulation [A. Pechstein and J. Sch&ouml;berl, The TDNNS method for Reissner-Mindlin plates,  J. Numer. Math. (2017) 137, pp. 713-740.]. \\
In this talk we present a shear locking free extension of the TDNNS method from linear Reissner--Mindlin plates to nonlinear Naghdi shells by means of a hierarchical approach. Therefore, the HHJ method for Koiter shells is enriched with shearing degrees of freedom, discretized by H(curl)-conforming N&eacute;d&eacute;lec elements. We discuss the small-strain regime leading to the HHJ and TDNNS method for linear Koiter and Naghdi shells. We show how the so-called Regge interpolant can be used in all methods to avoid membrane locking by inserting into the membrane energy term [M. Neunteufel, J. Sch&ouml;berl, Avoiding membrane locking with Regge interpolation, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng., 373 (2021), 113524].\\
Several benchmark examples, implemented in the open-source finite element software NGSolve (www.ngsolve.org), are presented to demonstrate the excellent performance of the proposed shell elements.
